# An Introduction to TiPi

TiPi is a Java *Toolkit for Inverse Problems and Imaging* developed as part the
[MiTiV](http://mitiv.univ-lyon1.fr/) project.  The objective of TiPi is to
provide a framework for developping fast algorithms for solving inverse
problems in particular in the domain of imaging.


## Contents

For now TiPi provides:

* Classes and methods to manage multi-dimensional arrays, so-called [*shaped
  arrays*](shaped-arrays.md), in a flexible way.

* Classes and methods to deal with so-called [*vectors*](vectors.md) which
  stores values in an efficient way.  These vectors are needed by iterative
  optimization methods and are typically used to store the data, theirs weights
  and the variables of the inverse problem.

* Limited memory optimization algorithms to deal with large scale non-linear
  problems.

* Building-block classes to encode objective functions (likelihood,
  regularization, etc.).

* Utilities for reading or writing data files, etc..


## Rationale and Performances Issues

[Vectors](vectors.md) are intended to have a limited set of methods.  These
methods are just those which are needed by optimization methods and merely
correspond to the properties of
"[*vectors*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_space)" in the conventional
linear algebra sense.  Hence the name of these objects in TiPi.

Thanks to these restrictions, "*vectors*" can be implemented in forms suitable
for performances (non-conventional or distributed memory, etc.) and a
particular implementation is simplified by the fact that only a few methods
have to be exposed.

However, *vectors* are not really adapted for the many manipulations required
to prepare the inputs of the algorithms (e.g., reading images, converting
types, perform zero-padding, recentering, etc.) and to save the result (e.g.,
extracting parts, rescaling, writing to a file, etc.).  This is why TiPi
provides another type of objects: the [shaped arrays](shaped-arrays.md).  These
objects are much more versatile and use conventional memory.  We were careful
so that their manipulation should be very flexible but, as far as possible, not
to the sacrifice of performances.

Typically, an algorithm written in the TiPi framework starts with shaped
arrays, does some pre-processing, creates vectors from the input arrays, runs
the iterative method, copies the result into a shaped array, displays and/or
saves the shaped array, perhaps after some post-processing.


## Developpers

Many classes in TiPi only differ by the type or rank of the shaped objects
which they implement.  To avoid tedious edition and management of many similar
source files, TiPi has its own pre-processor named `tpp`
([*the TiPi PreProcessor*](tpp.md)).  The Java code is generated from source
files which have (by convention) the extension `.javax` and which are stored in
the directory `src/codegen`.  If you want to modify an autogenerated class,
first edit the corresponding `.javax` source and then run the command:

    make all

in the directory `src/codegen`.
